Tutorial: How to track high volume APIs (#5898)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/tutorials/track-high-volume-apis.md

---
title: How to track high-volume APIs
date: 2023-05-02
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
sidebar: Docs
featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/tutorial-10.png
tags: ['feature flags', 'configuration']
---

> Tracking high-volume APIs is a balancing act. You want to keep them as efficient as possible, while still capturing the usage data to improve them. This tutorial aims to help you find this balance. In it, we build an API in Express, add PostHog, then implement two solutions for tracking:

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
Tracking high-volume APIs is a balancing act. You want to keep them as efficient as possible, while still capturing the usage data to improve them. This tutorial aims to help you find this balance. We'll build an API in Express, add PostHog, and then implement two solutions for tracking:
```

1. Sampling using feature flags

> 2. Caching usage and batching capture requests

Reviewer: what are `capture requests` ?

After doing this, we also show the different ways you can calculate insights.

## Building our API

To start, we will build a basic API that captures and returns the ID we passed to it. We use [Express, the Node server framework](/tutorials/node-express-analytics), to do this

Create a folder for our project, go into the folder, and initialize npm. When prompted, select all the default options.

```bash
mkdir high-volume
cd high-volume
npm init
```

Once done, install Express.

```bash
npm i express
```

In your `high-volume` folder, create a file named `index.js`, and set up a basic Express app.

```node
// index.js
const express = require('express');
const app = express();
const port = 3000

app.get('/', (req, res) => {
  res.send('Hello World!');
})

app.listen(port, () => {
  console.log(`App listening on http://localhost:${port}`)
})
```

> Lastly, create one more route as our high volume requests route. We set this route as  `/big/:id`. For now, it returns a message using the request ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, add a new route that will handle high volume requests and set its path to `/big/:id`. For now, return a string in the response using the request ID.
```

```node
//...
app.get('/big/:id', (req, res) => {
  res.send(`Welcome to the big route, ${req.params.id}`);
})
//...
```

### Adding PostHog

Next, we install and set up PostHog. 

```bash
npm i posthog-node
```

We set up the PostHog client with our project API key and instance address, both of which you can get from your [project settings](https://app.posthog.com/project/settings). We add a `client.capture()` call to our `/big` route. The capture call includes the route distinct ID and an event name. We also include a `firstRouteCalled` user property to use for a filter later. 

```node
const express = require('express');
const { PostHog } = require('posthog-node');
const app = express();
const port = 3000

const client = new PostHog(
  '<ph_project_api_key>',
  { host: '<ph_instance_address>'}
)

//...

app.get('/big/:id', (req, res) => {
  client.capture(
    { 
      event: 'big route',
      distinctId: req.params.id,
			properties: {
        $set_once: { firstRouteCalled: req.url },   
      },
    },
  );
  res.send(`Welcome to the big route, ${req.params.id}`);
})
//...
```

> When we go to the big route again, we capture an event that we can see in our PostHog instance.

Reviewer: I think since it's the only route we refer to, we don't always need to refer to it as big
```suggestion
When we go to our route again, we capture an event that we can see in our PostHog instance.
```

![Event](../images/tutorials/track-high-volume-apis/event.png)

> In our situation, capturing every single request to this route creates many requests. It hurts the performance of our API to make a capture request every time. Instead, we will use two different strategies for capturing them: sampling and batching.

Reviewer: Nice explanation!

```suggestion
In our situation, capturing every single request to this route creates many requests. It hurts the performance of our API to make a capture request every time. Instead, we can use two different strategies for capturing them: sampling and batching.
```

## 1. Sampling with feature flags and local evaluation

> We can use feature flags to sample users. This way we can easily control what amount of events we capture. For example, we can set up a flag to only capture specific or a percentage of:

Reviewer: Alternatively also: `This way, we can easily control the quantity of events that we capture`
```suggestion
We can use feature flags to sample users. This way, we can easily control how many events we capture. For example, we can set up a flag to only capture specific or a percentage of:
```

Reviewer: Also, perhaps worth mentioning another benefit is that you can control this without having to redeploy a new build and can just update the number in the dashboard?

- Users
- Cohorts
- Groups

> To set this up, we must create a feature flag. In PostHog, go to the feature flags tab, click new feature flag, add a key (I chose "sample"), select a rollout out (I chose "100% of users where `firstRouteCalled` equals `/big/1`"), and click save. At any point, we can edit this flag to change the number of events we capture (sample). 

Reviewer: 1. Sentence is a bit long, consider breaking up into points

2.  I dont think you need to say what you did

If you'd still like to include it, for this sentence:
` (I chose "100% of users where `firstRouteCalled` equals `/big/1`")`
It's a bit unclear to me what this is or how to set it. So worth further explanation or attaching a screenshot to clarify

```suggestion
To set this up, we must create a new feature flag:

1. In PostHog, go to the feature flags tab, click new feature flag.
2. Give your key a name 
3. Select your rollout conditions – e.g. 100% of users in a specific cohort.
4. Click save. 

The main benefit of this setup is that we can edit this flag at any time to change to change the number of events we capture. 
```

### Adding our flag to our code

> With our flag created, we can add it to our code around our `client.capture()` call. We just need to make our route async, then call `client.isFeaturedEnabled()` with our flag key and distinct ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now wrap our existing `client.capture()`call with our feature flag code. To do this, we need to make our route async, and then call `client.isFeaturedEnabled()` with our flag key and distinct ID.
```

```node
// index.js
//...
app.get('/big/:id', async (req, res) => {

>   const sample = await client.isFeatureEnabled('sample', req.params.id);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  const sample = await client.isFeatureEnabled('feature_flag_key', req.params.id);
```

Author: 👍

>   if (sample) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if (eventSampling) {
```

    client.capture(
      { 
        event: 'big route',
        distinctId: req.params.id,
        properties: {
          $set_once: { firstRouteCalled: req.url },   
        },
      },
    );
  }
  res.send(`Welcome to the big route, ${req.params.id}`);
})
//...
```

> You might notice that this sends a "Feature Flag Called" event to PostHog on every call. We can turn this off by adding `{ sendFeatureFlagEvents: false }` to our `client.isFeatureEnabled()` call.

Reviewer: nice 
<a href="https://gitme.me/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia2.giphy.com%2Fmedia%2FRgfGmnVvt8Pfy%2Fgiphy.gif&token=nice" data-gitmeme-token="nice"><img src="https://media2.giphy.com/media/RgfGmnVvt8Pfy/giphy.gif" title="Created by gitme.me with /nice"/></a>

```node
//...
const sample = await client.isFeatureEnabled(
	'sample',
	req.params.id,
	{ sendFeatureFlagEvents: false }
);
//...
```

### Locally evaluating our flag

> Another problem is that every feature flag called on the server side sends a request to PostHog to evaluate the flag. Over a high volume of API calls, this small difference can add up. We can limit this by locally evaluating the flag with person properties the flag relies on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another problem is that every feature flag call on the server side sends a request to PostHog to evaluate the flag. In a high volume API endpoint, these small differences can add up. We can limit this by evaluating the flag locally using the person properties the flag relies on.
```

To do this, add `firstRouteCalled` in `personProperties` to the options in our `client.isFeatureEnabled()` call.

```node
//...
const sample = await client.isFeatureEnabled(
    'sample',
    req.params.id,
    { 
      sendFeatureFlagEvents: false,
      personProperties: {
        'firstRouteCalled': req.url,
      },
    }
  );
//...
```

> In my small example, this cut response time by about 10ms, and every millisecond counts for high-volume APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this small example, this reduced response time by about 10ms. Every millisecond counts for high-volume APIs!
```

Author: It's actually much more than this, so made a better update.

> ## 2. Cache usage and batch events

Reviewer: It's a bit unclear that if this is the next step or if this is another separate option. Perhaps we should say something like "Option 2: Cache usage and batch events"

Author: Good point.

> Another way to capture events for high-volume APIs is to cache usage of the API and then capture a batch of events at a time interval. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way to capture events for high-volume APIs is to cache usage of the API and then upload batch events at regular intervals. 
```

To do this, we use [node-cache](https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-cache) to create a basic cache to store the number of requests, then use [node-cron](https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-cron) to set up a cron job to read the cache, capture values for each of the IDs, and clear the cache. 

First, install them both.

```bash
npm i node-cache node-cron
```

> Next, set up our cache which simply gets the current value for the param ID and then increments it.

Reviewer: This is unclear

Author: Reworded

```node
// index.js
//...
const NodeCache = require('node-cache');
const cache = new NodeCache()

//...

app.get('/big/:id', async (req, res) => {

>   let calls = cache.get(req.params.id) || 0;

Reviewer: nit: I think a better name for this variable will make this easier to follow. For example: 

```suggestion
  let apiCalls = cache.get(req.params.id) || 0;
```

  calls++;
  cache.set(req.params.id, calls);

  res.send(`Welcome to the big route, ${req.params.id}`);
})
//...
```

> After, we can set up our cron job to loop through the keys in the cache, get the number of events for that key, capture a batch event with a distinct ID (we use later), then clear the cache once completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now set up our cron job to loop through the keys in the cache, get the number of events for that key, capture a batch event with a distinct ID (we use later), and then clear the cache once completed.
```

```node
// index.js
//...
const cron = require('node-cron');

//...

cron.schedule('*/10 * * * * *', () => {
  cache.keys().forEach((key) => {
    let calls = cache.get(key);
    client.capture(
      { 
        event: 'big route batch',
        distinctId: key,
        properties: { 

>           calls: calls,
> 					distinctId: key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          calls: calls,
	  distinctId: key
```

        },
      },
    );
  });
  cache.flushAll();
});
```

> Once you run this and send multiple events to different IDs, you see batch events with calls as a property.

Reviewer: This is unclear. What do you mean by "send multiple events to different IDs" ?
```suggestion
Once you run this and send multiple events to different IDs, you see batch events with the API calls as a property.
```

Author: Reworded

![Batch](../images/tutorials/track-high-volume-apis/batch.png)

## Insights with batched events

Creating insights for batched or sampled events requires a little more planning than standard insights. This is because the actual values require one more step of setup. We rely on both formula mode and property aggregations to get the actual values we want for analysis.

### Extrapolating sampled events with formula mode

If we want sampled events to represent actual usage, we can multiply the rollout percentage to extrapolate a total count. For example, if we rolled out a flag to capture 10% of events, we can create an insight that takes the total count of events and multiplies it by 10.

![Extrapolated](../images/tutorials/track-high-volume-apis/extrapolated.png)

> If you are doing this, it is important to make sure your rollout percentage matches your formula multiple to avoid large inaccuracies. Of course, any extrapolation isn’t perfectly accurate anyways.

Reviewer: Not sure I would include the last sentence. It's slightly confusing and I dont think adding much value

```suggestion
If you are doing this, it is important to make sure your rollout percentage matches your formula multiple to avoid large inaccuracies.
```

### Aggregating event properties

> For our batched events, we can create an insight that uses the big route batch event, then sums the property value of calls to give us our total number of calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our batched events, we can create an insight that uses the big route batch event, and then sums the property value of calls to give us our total number of calls.
```

---
title: How to track high-volume APIs
date: 2023-05-05
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
sidebar: Docs
featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/tutorial-10.png
tags: ['feature flags', 'configuration']
---

> Tracking high-volume APIs is a balancing act. You want to keep them as efficient as possible, while still capturing the usage data to improve them. This tutorial aims to help you find this balance. We'll build an API in Express, add PostHog, and then implement two solutions for tracking:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tracking high-volume APIs is a balancing act. You want to keep them as efficient as possible, while still capturing data to improve them. This tutorial aims to help you find this balance. 

We'll build an API in Express, add PostHog, and then implement two solutions for tracking:
```

1. Sampling using feature flags
2. Caching usage and batching event capture

After doing this, we also show the different ways you can calculate insights.

## Building our API

> To start, we will build a basic API that captures and returns the ID we passed to it. We use [Express, the Node server framework](/tutorials/node-express-analytics), to do this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start, we will build a basic API that captures and returns the ID that is passed to it. We'll use [Express, the Node server framework](/tutorials/node-express-analytics), to do this.
```

 We add a `client.capture()` call to our `/big` route. The capture call includes the route distinct ID and an event name. We also include a `firstRouteCalled` user property to use for a filter later. 

```node
const express = require('express');
const { PostHog } = require('posthog-node');
const app = express();
const port = 3000

const client = new PostHog(
  '<ph_project_api_key>',
  { 
    host: '<ph_instance_address>',
    personalApiKey: '<ph_personal_api_key>'
  }
)

//...

app.get('/big/:id', (req, res) => {
  client.capture(
    { 
      event: 'big route',
      distinctId: req.params.id,
			properties: {
        $set_once: { firstRouteCalled: req.url },   
      },
    },
  );
  res.send(`Welcome to the big route, ${req.params.id}`);
})
//...
```

When we go to our route again, we capture an event that we can see in our PostHog instance.

![Event](../images/tutorials/track-high-volume-apis/event.png)

> In our situation, capturing every single request to this route creates many requests. It hurts the performance of our API to make a capture request every time. Instead, we can use two different strategies for capturing them: sampling and batching.

Reviewer: Feel free to ignore
```suggestion
In this scenario, capturing every single request to this route creates many capture requests. It hurts the performance of our API to make a request every time. Instead, we can use two different strategies for capturing them: sampling and batching.
```

## Option 1. Sampling with feature flags and local evaluation

We can use feature flags to sample users. This way, we can easily control how many events we capture without needing to redeploy. For example, we can set up a flag to only capture specific or a percentage of:

- Users
- Cohorts
- Groups

To set this up, we must create a new feature flag:

1. In PostHog, go to the feature flags tab, click new feature flag.
2. Set your key name, such as `sample-flag`.

> 3. Select your rollout conditions, such as 100% of users in a specific cohort. I chose "100% of users where the `firstRouteCalled` person property (we set earlier) equals `/big/1`"

Reviewer: nice
```suggestion
3. Select your rollout conditions, such as 100% of users in a specific cohort. I chose "100% of users where the `firstRouteCalled` person property (we set earlier) equals `/big/1`".
```

      personProperties: {
        'firstRouteCalled': req.url,
      },
    }
  );
//...
```

In our small example, this reduced response time by about 100ms. A massive amount for high-volume APIs where every millisecond counts.

## Option 2. Cache usage and batch events

Another way to capture events for high-volume APIs is to cache usage of the API and then capture a batch of events at regular intervals. 

To do this, we use [node-cache](https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-cache) to create a basic cache to store the number of requests, then use [node-cron](https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-cron) to set up a cron job to read the cache, capture values for each of the IDs, and clear the cache. 

First, install them both.

```bash
npm i node-cache node-cron
```

Next, set up our cache. It simply gets the amount of API calls for a param ID and then increments it.

```node
// index.js
//...
const NodeCache = require('node-cache');
const cache = new NodeCache()

//...

app.get('/big/:id', async (req, res) => {
  let apiCalls = cache.get(req.params.id) || 0;
  apiCalls++;
  cache.set(req.params.id, apiCalls);

  res.send(`Welcome to the big route, ${req.params.id}`);
})
//...
```

> We can now set up our cron job to loop through the keys in the cache, get the number of events for that key, capture a batch event with a distinct ID (we use later), and then clear the cache once completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now set up our cron job to loop through the keys in the cache, get the number of events for that key, capture a batch event with a distinct ID (which we'll use later), and then clear the cache once completed.
```

```node
// index.js
//...
const cron = require('node-cron');

//...

cron.schedule('*/10 * * * * *', () => {
  cache.keys().forEach((key) => {
    let apiCalls = cache.get(key);
    client.capture(
      { 
        event: 'big route batch',
        distinctId: key,
        properties: { 
          calls: apiCalls,
	  distinctId: key
        },
      },
    );
  });
  cache.flushAll();
});
```

> Once you restart the server and send multiple events to different IDs, you will see the event batches in your PostHog instance. Each batch event has the amount of API calls as a property which we can use for our analysis.

Reviewer: This sentence is confusing. What do you mean by restart the server? Wouldn't that lose all state?
Do you mean "flush the cache" ?

Author: You need to restart the server to implement the changes, I'll clarify.
